For this exercise on exception handling
we're
actually not going to do any exception
handling.
Instead I'm going to show you ways to
write code so exceptions won't be thrown.
So we're gonna get started by opening a
program we'll call except ex1.py.
We're gonna start with the divide by 0
exception, 0 division error, that we saw
earlier.
What I'm doing right now is I'm writing
a function that simulates a very simple
calculator.
So, bear with me while I write this code.
You'll see what it does.
It's very simple.
And then finally, we have division.
So
that's the function.
Now what we're gonna do is write a program
that uses a
loop, and continuously asks the user to
enter another equation to compute.
So we're gonna have a while loop.
That prompts the user to enter a number.
And this will be an integer calculator
just to keep things simple.
Then we'll ask them to enter the second
number.
Then we'll ask them to enter the
operation.
Again the problem that could come up is if
the
user enters a zero for the denominator in
a division statement.
Were in a division problem.
So, we can test for that by saying if the
operator is equal to slash and
the second number is equal to 0, then
we're going to say, cannot
divide by 0, then right here we're gonna
issue a continue statement.
Which will cause the program to go back to
the top of the loop and start over again.
Now that's probably carrying it a bit too
far.
We really only need to have the second
number, but we can't really get to
that point without using a go to statement
which we're not going to even talk about.
So we have to just go back to the top of
the loop.
Otherwise, we'll call the calc function
with the three arguments.
Right, so let's safe and run the program.
See if it works.
So we'll enter a 3 and a 2 and we'll do
multiplication, and that worked fine.
So now let's do a division.
12 and 0.
And division.
And it says, cannot divide by 0.
Enter the first number, enter the second
number, enter the operation.
And there we go.
Now, one thing we left out, and let's fix
that real quick is,
we left out the prompt to ask the user if
they wanna continue.
And that's all we need.
I'm not gonna add that in to the program,
cuz you saw how it worked.
So that's our first example of how we can
write our code to protect against an
exception being thrown.
This makes your code easier to read,
easier to understand and easier to
maintain.
Let's comment out all this code.
This is easier than starting a new file.
Our second example's gonna demonstrate how
to work with file handling.
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna
write
a simple program that opens files and
prints the contents.
So we ask the user to enter a file name to
open.
Following the same strategy as the
previous program,
we're going to use a special function
called isfile.
And it's actually found in os.path.isfile.
And what this does is, this snippet of
code
right here will check to see if a file
exists.
And so what we are saying is that if the
file does not exist then we're gonna print
an error message.
Then we're gonna prompt the user to enter
the file again and continue on.
Otherwise, once the user does enter a
legal file name, we're
gonna open the file and then we're gonna
print out each line.
Just like so.
So again the key is saying, while the file
does
not exist, and that's this part of the
code right there.
Then we prompt the user, first telling
them that the
file doesn't exist, and then to enter the
file name again.
Alright, so let's run this example.
Let's
clear the screen.
So, let's try one that we know doesn't
exist.
Blah.txt.
File does not exist.
Enter file name to open.
Blah1.txt.
That's not it.
bbbbb.txt.
But, I happen to know that we do have a
file.
Called grades.txt.
And then when it finds it, it opens it up
and displays the contents.
So in this exercise, I've demonstrated
ways to actually
not have to use exception handling and
most programing experts
would say that for problems such as the
ones we've
looked at, diving by zero and files not
existing, using.
What I would call data validation
techniques
works better than using the exception
handling.
And with that, we're finished with this
exercise and that wraps up this chapter.